People think that you were born with
your personality and you're just stuck
with it. But just because you've always
been a certain way doesn't mean you have
to stay that way.
>> Olga Hazat,
>> the author of Me Butter,
>> the science and promise of personality
change.
>> Can an introvert actually become an
extrovert if they want to?
>> Rather than permanently changing, learn
the ability to try on this personality
trait, put on extraversion.
Is there an age at which it's impossible
to change our personality?
>> Some people change more after they're
30. Different choices that we make can
change us throughout our lives.
>> What's the difference between changing
our habits and changing our personality
traits?
>> So, you can actually fake it until you
make it. Once you do your habits often
enough, they will become part of your
personality and it won't feel fake
anymore. It'll feel like it's part of
your identity.
How does this apply to people who are
diagnosed with depression or ADHD? Can
they also change or is that very
different?
>> There's actually been this push in
psychology to identify the personality
traits that are associated with things
like depression and ADHD and actually
has gone headto-head with Lexapro, the
anti-depressant, and it works just as
well.
>> The number one health and wellness
podcast,
>> J Shetty. J Shetty,
>> the one, the only J Shetty.
>> Olga, I wanted to dive straight in and
the first thing I wanted to ask you is
if someone listens to this episode, if
someone reads your book, what are you
hoping they can change and shift in
their life? What are you hoping for
them?
>> I hope that they realize that whatever
is kind of wrong in their life or not
working for them currently, that they
can change that no matter what age they
are or where they live or what kind of
job they have. you know, if they feel
like they don't have enough community
support, they don't have enough friends
that they can go out and make those
friends. If they feel like their uh
progression in their career is being
blocked by inability to publicly speak
or connect with large audiences, that
they can learn those skills. You know,
if they feel kind of disorganized or
like they can't really get motivated,
that they can learn organizational
skills and make that happen for
themselves. So, it's really just
whatever your goals are and that you're
able to align your traits and your
behaviors with your goals.
>> I love that. I mean, that sounds like
something we all need and and applies to
each and every one of us. How did you
discover this to be a block? Like, when
did you recognize that this was a block
for people and what was that block that
you were facing and trying to solve?
>> It was really just that I was very
unhappy and there was no particular
reason for it. So, it wasn't like, oh,
if this just gets resolved, I'll be
happy again. You know, I kind of start
my book with this anecdote about being
in Miami in December, a beautiful time
to be in Miami. You know, the weather is
unimpeachable, cannot be improved upon,
staying in this great place, having a
great work life balance, things with my
partner were good. It was before we had
our baby, so we weren't tired. But I
just had this day where I had all these
like minor frustrations. Um, you know, I
got this really bad haircut and I got
stuck in traffic and I I got some photos
taken of me that I wasn't crazy about. I
was just like, uh, I hate these photos
and I knew they were going to be
released widely. I had this like
frustrating incident at a grocery store
and I get back to our Airbnb where we're
staying and I just kind of have a
meltdown and I'm I like kind of feel
just broadly unhappy with everything.
you know, I immediately turned to
alcohol, which is what I would do at the
time to manage my emotions. And I was
just sort of so frustrated. Um, and then
even like a few minutes later, I kind of
thought, hey, why am why is this all
getting to me? Like, if you look at
anything about this situation, you know,
I'm in this beautiful setting. Nothing
is really wrong. I didn't get in a car
accident or, you know, I I wasn't even
late for anything. You know, I didn't
get fired from my job. My hair, whatever
grows back. I kind of realized that so
often minor frustrations would really
add up to me because of my high level of
this trait called neuroticism, which is
uh kind of associated with depression
and anxiety. And so I kind of would get
in these negative spirals where I would
kind of add up these small things, these
small negative events and let them kind
of ruin my whole day or my whole week or
start this narrative where my life is is
so bad. I can never be happy because
these small frustrations happen to me.
And I decided to kind of try to change
that because you're never going to have
a life without small frustrations. Like
nothing is ever going to go perfectly.
So the only way to be happy is to be
able to be happy despite that.
>> How did that link to personality?
>> There was some interesting research
coming out that people can actually
change their personality traits. And
when they do change their personality
traits, they actually become, you know,
happier, healthier, whatever it is that
that trait is correlated with. It it can
really kind of increase all these
positive elements of their lives. And so
we think of personality as something
that we're just kind of stuck with. Like
I am this kind of person and this is
what I will always do. I'm the kind of
person who will always get frustrated by
small inconveniences. But really, we
have the ability to change the way we
respond to situations. we have the
ability to change our behaviors, even
our kind of typical thought patterns.
And really, by changing those
consistently, we have the ability to
change personality. So, that's kind of
when I was like, maybe I should try a
version of this for myself.
>> What is personality? Like, how do you
define it? Because I feel like it gets
thrown around and then it gets mixed
with so many different words. How how do
you define it?
>> Yeah, a lot of people are like, "Oh, is
it like the kind of jokes you tell or
you know, whether you're kind of loud
and boisterous?" Those are all kind of
elements of personality. The way that
personality scientists define it is the
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that
come most naturally to you. So something
happens, someone honks at you at a red
light, you know, or something, you know,
do you flip them off? Do you wave at
them cuz you're really good naturatured,
you know, do you, you know, meditate to
yourself? That kind of shows your
personality. And uh the researcher that
I follow the most for this book uh
Nathan Hudson who has done a lot of the
research on personality change he
actually adds another element to that
which is that personality helps you get
what you want. So personality is how we
go about pursuing our goals.
Agreeableness which is another
personality trait can help you make more
friends. It can attract people to you.
It can kind of make you you know one of
those people who has like a huge bridal
party at your wedding. conscientiousness
can help you, you know, get up earlier,
get more done during the day, um, get
promotions at work and things like that
if that's what you're into. So, kind of
on top of being this like reflex and
habit, it's also a way that we pursue
what we want out of life.
>> Why do you think all of us feel so stuck
in who we are and start to believe
things like, I'm just not a funny
person. I'm just a disorganized person.
I'm just a negative person. Why do we
get so stuck? I think it's because we've
been told for a long time that
personality is permanent and that we
just are a certain way. I think some of
this comes from the fact that
personality is partly genetic. So you
think that, you know, something is
genetic. It's inherited. You're going to
be just like your parents. What are your
parents like? They're like this and
that. You're going to be a combo of
that. It doesn't really work that way.
We do obviously personality is is like
everything partly genetic but that means
that it it's kind of a combination of
different genes the environment that
you're in and also your own decisions
and your own actions and what you choose
to do can shape your personality but I
think for a long time the way scientists
have talked about it it sort of did feel
like a death sentence kind of like
you're going to be this way forever. um
you know the famous uh William James
quote personality is set like plaster
after the age of 30 and so especially
after 30 people think that they're stuck
being a certain way but really the more
recent psychological literature has
shown that people actually change both
naturally just like without really
trying to they they kind of change over
time and people can also change over
shorter periods of time by taking
concerted effort. Do we know how much
personality is nature versus nurture?
>> It depends on the trait and kind of the
person but it's about 40 to 60%
heritable and I want to caveat that
heavily. So so that means it's it's
let's say let's call it half um comes
from your genes but if you think about
it you're not like your parents twin
right? So, so your genes, you get genes
from them, but they kind of get combined
in these unexpected ways and they might
manifest in different ways depending on
um the environment that you grew up, the
environment that you live in now, what
kind of job you have. And so, it's
really this gene environment interaction
that creates a lot of unpredictability
in in how your personality is going to
manifest. Just because you know that you
have something genetically doesn't mean
that you're kind of doomed to be that
way or that it's definitely going to
turn out a certain way.
>> Is there an age from which we can't
change our personality? You just gave
that example of, you know, that old
quote about the idea of 30 and it's set
in blaster. Is there an age at which
it's impossible to change our
personality?
>> So, there have been studies that show
that some people change more after
they're 30 than before. So most people
change a a lot during their teen years
and especially during their early 20s.
Um so that's a time of very rapid
change. A lot of people kind of become a
version of who they'll be for a a part
of their life during that time. Both in
my interviews with people and in um just
the scientific literature, people kind
of change throughout their lives across
all the traits. uh different life events
can change us, different social roles,
different goals that we have and
different kind of choices that we make
can change us throughout our lives.
>> I like how everything you mentioned are
things that people want to change for
themselves but not changing for people.
>> Yeah. So that's been a big um
misconception about this topic is people
are like, "Well, I don't want to change
my personality to please anyone." I'm
don't do that. Like don't change your
personality to please anyone. like
that's definitely not my message. I
think you should change your personality
to please yourself and to get what you
want out of life, not to please other
people. So that's yeah, that's like a
key distinction.
>> Yeah. And and how do we even go about
knowing how we have to change our
personality? Because I think when you
really believe it's almost like living
in a city. So, it's like let's say I've
I was talking to someone yesterday and
they said, "I have lived in this town
for 31 years and I'm about to move to a
bigger city and I'm scared and nervous."
That's almost what it feels like when
you're changing your personality because
you're like, I have lived in this body
and this mind and this personality for
31 years. I don't even know which other
city I want to live in. I don't even
know which other personality I need or
want. How do you even unearth and
uncover how you may want to change your
personality and what the right trait is?
>> So, there's um kind of the dorky
scientific way and then there's sort of
less scientific like woo woo ways that
might even work better. So, the
scientific way is uh there's a big five
personality test. It'll it'll measure
where you fall along the five
personality traits. So it'll tell you
kind of compared to everyone else on
Earth, you are much less extroverted
than other people. So you, you know,
you're very low on extroversion. And so
you might look at that score and think
to yourself, I'd like to change that.
I'd like to be more outgoing. I'd like
to make new friends. Whatever it is to
do with extraversion that you want. And
so then you can go about pursuing that
goal. What I think you could also do is
just like think about your values and
think about what it is you you want out
of life. Like a lot of people say they
don't want to become more extroverted.
And I kind of think that's fine if
that's not a value that you have, but
I've also talked to a lot of people who
are like, look, I want to get, you know,
a job as a manager at work. I don't want
to, you know, be rank and file forever.
I want to grow in my career. And that
requires a certain amount of
extraversion. Like to lead people, to
speak persuasively, even just to manage
people requires you to have extraversion
skills. So if you think about that as a
value for yourself, you could start to
consider whether extraversion might be a
trait that you want to work on. Another
way that I did this personally is that I
kind of looked at the people of in my
life that I was jealous of. So I have a
friend who's very good at making
friends. Like she just is a huge people
person and people love her and are drawn
to her and she could move to a new city
and make 10 friends and be having dinner
with them that night. And I was really
jealous of that. I was like, I kind of
want that skill. Like I was actually
like texting her like, how do you do
that? Um, and so you could just look at
your life at, you know, the people who
do things that you're kind of like, oo,
that's cool. Like I kind of want to do
that cuz that'll tell you the
personality traits that matter to you.
>> Yeah. I've always talked about how you
can transform envy into study.
>> And and that's kind of how I've been my
whole life. anytime I've looked at
someone and admired them or liked
something that they have, whether it's a
trait, a skill, an ability, I'm like,
"How did you get that?" Right? And it's
that idea. And but it's interesting.
I've always been wired that way. So
that's always been my natural
>> kind of when you were saying your
thoughts that you naturally had, that's
kind of how I naturally always been. If
I find something impressive, I want to
know how to do it and how to build it
and how to grow it as opposed to feeling
like they're special and I can't have
that. If that makes sense. Mhm.
>> What about those of us who just feel,
well, people should like me for the way
I am. If I can't make friends as being
authentically me, and the word authentic
now has become this big buzzword and
trend. So, how does that fit into that
idea of, well, people should love to
hang out with you just the way you are?
You shouldn't have to be extrovert like
your friend. Are you being inauthentic
by changing your personality? I mean,
the truth is is that no one is ever
authentically
themselves 100%, right? That could be
kind of off-putting if you just said
everything that came to your mind
without any kind of filter or like I
think there was like a movie once where
it's like someone just said whatever
they were thinking and it like people
were very offended cuz you know it's we
actually do have a a filter between
ourselves and other people because we
know that people kind of don't want that
like completely raw like spurof the mind
thoughts that come to us. So that's one
thing is that one, you're probably
already filtering yourself at least a
little bit. Maybe you're doing it in a
in a kind way where like, you know, if a
friend is in a bad relationship, you
don't necessarily want to be like,
"Yeah, keep dating that guy." You know,
but you you might say like, "Hey, like
have you thought about like what you're
getting out of this, you know, but you
you might not just launch into a rant
about how that person sucks, right? Like
you find ways of saying things that
appeal to people." The other thing is
that like how do you know what your
authentic self is? Like
>> Yeah. Well, that's what I'm saying is
like I don't know that like we have
necessarily a genuine consistent
authentic self that we need to like
preserve at all costs. I think that a
lot of times our emotions are kind of
fleeting and if you say something one
day, you might not say it again the same
way the next day. or if you feel
something about about something one one
day, you might not feel that same way
the next week. So, you know, which one
of those is is authentic? You know, are
you exactly the same as you were in
college? If not, are you are you faking
it? Like, you know what I mean? It's we
all kind of change and shift over time
and depending on the situation. I don't
necessarily think there's anything wrong
with that. I think that's called growth.
>> Yeah. It's weird how we're fascinated by
this addiction to authenticity right
now. Yeah. when I agree with you. I I
think authenticity is you showing up in
different ways at different time with
different people because you can't
possibly be the same person with
everyone and you're not going to expose
your full self to everyone at all times.
It's just not a natural thing to do. But
it's weird that we have this guise of
authenticity that seems to be clouding
our ability to grow when actually
probably the most authentic thing we can
do as humans is to grow.
>> Yeah. Exactly.
>> To choose to change.
>> Yeah. And I I don't know. I just think
that um
>> that's what survival is, right?
>> Yeah. No, no one is going to call you
out for, I don't know, trying new things
or trying new skills or trying new new
traits. I think that that can also be a
part of authenticity. Anything that you
do for the first time is going to feel a
little inauthentic.
>> That's the interesting part is that we
had Viniang on recently who's a
communication expert and public speaking
expert and he was saying that we change
how we dress and we don't think that's
inauthentic but then we don't change the
way we speak. He was saying that our
communication style remains exactly the
same our whole life. So if we're
monotonous and boring and we just think
that's who we are, but the reality is
that we we are changing other parts of
ourel. And you're right, when you try a
new hairstyle, it feels a little
uncomfortable for the first week. When
you try a new pair of shoes or a new fit
of clothing, it feels a bit
uncomfortable. And that's not
inauthentic. It's you trying to change
your style or what fits you. And we can
do the same with our personality. What
are the gender effects on personality?
Um, women tend to be more uh
conscientious uh in some ways, more
agreeable and also much more neurotic.
Uh, neuroticism is like highly
associated with being female.
>> If someone wants to be more extroverted,
what do they do every day? What do they
need to change?
>> All you have to do is talk to people and
it can take
>> when you don't want to.
>> Yes. How does this work apply to people
in relationships where they want their
partner to change and you'll hear
someone go, I just see their potential.
I knew I know who they could be. They
could they could really get it together,
but they don't see it in themselves.
>> Yeah.
>> When someone's thinking that way, how
would you encourage them to think about
change? I really wish I had written a
chapter of this book called How to
Change Your Partner because every single
interviewer has asked me that question
and I don't really have a good answer
because we haven't really studied how to
change other people.
>> What's the difference between changing
our habits and changing our personality
traits? How do they connect or
>> This is a huge debate within psychology.
I will try to give the uh not super
nerdy version of it. So some
psychologists think that habits
basically become personality traits
after a period of time. So if you if
it's your habit to do something and you
do it consistently for years, okay,
you're now this is your personality.
Some psychologists think that there's
also an element of like thought behind
that where if you do something and you
really like to do it, you kind of start
to incorporate it into your personality.
You start to kind of make it part of
your identity. This is like uh you know
people who become runners and then they
like kind of identify as runners and
they're like as a runner you know and
they're like running marathons you know
that's sort of like more part of their
personality is like exercising a ton and
being you know really we would say
conscientious about running more so than
someone who just like kind of mindlessly
takes a jog every day and and they don't
really think too much about it. It's a
gray area between those two poles. like
uh I didn't used to be very
conscientious, but I am now. And I can't
tell you exactly when the switch
happened from me just making a ton of
to-do lists and like leaving early for
everything and like being like remember
this, remember this to like now me just
doing it naturally. To me, it makes
sense that our habits somewhat lean into
our personality because a repetitive
action or a consistent action feels like
it becomes normality and then once it
becomes normality. But I but I
appreciate the distinction between for
example I a habit I have is to brush my
teeth twice a day but I don't identify
yeah as a brusher of teeth. Right. It's
it's something I do but it's not an
identity. So I I noticed that nuance
whereas I play pickle ball three to four
times a week and I consider myself to be
a pickler. Right. That idea is there's
an identity associated with that and
it's I guess that's what you're saying
is the difference between personality
and habit.
>> Yeah. You incorporate it into yourself a
little bit more. Um I have I have one
example which is public speaking is part
of my job like speaking at events,
moderating events, doing stuff like
this. And uh when I first started uh
many years ago, I was not good at it. I
was kind of painfully just like really
shy. It made me really uncomfortable to
do things like this. And I kind of just
brute forced kind of tried to get better
at it. And I I worked super hard and it
it did become a habit. I did I had to do
a ton of these events and like we were
always having them especially before co
and I kind of felt like eventually I now
really don't think about it like I kind
of like if an event is coming up and I
have to moderate something I'm like oh
okay what time do I need to be there
it's not even a a process of like
psyching myself up or oh gosh I'm so
nervous even my physiological responses
are not the same like I don't get like
sweaty palms and kind of jittery and
stuff like that so I I don't know like
is is being extroverted in that way I
It's part of my personality now because
I kind of reflexively do it. But in that
intervening time, it was definitely like
I'm not extroverted. I'm trying really
hard to be and I'm building this habit
so that I can be.
>> Yeah. Mine experience is exactly the
same. My I was so shy growing up as a
kid. My parents forced me to go to
public speaking and drama school from
age 11 to 18. And I took exams in public
speaking. I was trained 9 hours a week
for seven years, eight years of my life.
and it transformed my ability to stand
up in front of a room. I've now been
public speaking since I was 11. I'm 37
now. So, it's what 26 years of
experience. So, you could ask me to give
a talk on any subject in 3 minutes and
I'd feel comfortable. Granted, the
subject would have to be something I'm
aware of, not something out of my
expertise, but it would feel comfortable
and easy and I would feel calm. If you
asked me to do that when I was 11, that
would not be the case. And if you asked
me to do that at 21, I would have had
the skills, but I wouldn't have had the
passion to talk about things. And so, I
had to find what I was passionate about.
But I fully believe that people aren't
just born with skills that we notice
them. And I think we've created this
myth in society where people are just
magical or special or gifted. And that
actually does two things. The first is
it limits us from becoming those people
or achieving those things. And the
second thing is it actually discredits
those people for the amount of work
they've put in. So when you look at the
greatest athletes in the world, I had
the fortune of interviewing Kobe Bryant
few months before he passed. He was in
the gym for twice as long as everyone
else. That's what he said in his words.
So you could argue he was gifted and
special and all those things. And I'm
not saying he wasn't, but he would say
it was because he was in the gym for
twice as long as everyone else. He was
getting a 4-hour shift in the gym before
anyone woke up. And that was the
difference maker in his mind. When you
look at Cristiano Ronaldo, who's the
biggest soccer player in the world, it's
the same. Anyone who's been in his
vicinity will say, "Well, he has a chef
that's dialed in for his health, and he
has the best recovery program, and he
has the best fitness and wellness
expert." when you look at it through his
head, it's all work. Whereas when you
look at it from the outside, you think
it's magic and
>> gifted, right? And so I think we
discredit that person's work ethic by
saying it's magic and special. And we
actually steal the opportunity from
ourselves
from saying I can't do that because I
didn't I wasn't born with that. And so I
hope everyone who's listening is having
that recognition to say you can do it.
And anyone that you admire has just put
in the work, whether it's public
speaking like yourself or whether it's
playing four hours of basketball more
than the average person.
>> Yeah. And that's that's a great example.
And that is the same with personality
change. Anyone who has a skill or a
trait that you admire has probably put a
lot of effort into that.
>> How long does it take then to change a
personality trait?
>> That's a good question and it really
depends on the trait. So, I found with
extraversion,
extroversion was one of the traits that
I wanted to increase. I kind of felt
socially isolated and like I didn't just
really know a lot of people in my
community and also just especially after
co I was like I I kind of just don't
talk to anyone like in my house all the
time and I even though it was you know
safe to to do so. So, uh, for that one,
I noticed the changes really quickly.
Like, I I found that I went from a
preference to just stay at home on my
couch and watch Netflix to a preference
to get out there and talk to people,
meet up with people, even if it's just
at a in a surface level way. I found
that change happened after like a couple
months, like maybe a month or two with
something more performative, like I did
improv classes as well. That took
several months for me to truly get
comfortable just because I'm not, as I
said, a natural performer and I that
gave me a lot of anxiety. So, that one
took a little bit longer. With something
like neuroticism, which is depression
and anxiety, it's something that can be
really rooted in yourself. Like, it's
not purely behavioral, right? Like you
can notice that someone is pretty calm
seeming, but they could be really
anxious on the inside. That can take a
rather long time to change and to shift.
Um but it's possible.
>> Yes. So, so the studies that we have
show like it's like a a few months of
therapy can really create a significant
change in neuroticism. What I did was
like a meditation class that I think it
lasted uh 8 weeks or 12 weeks or
something like that.
>> What type of meditation? Uh
>> it was MBSR and it's just pure
mindfulness meditation for dummies.
Nothing special to it. And that did work
to decrease my neuroticism after I think
like 3 months.
>> How what did it do? I am still totally
not sure what meditation
specifically does in the mind. I will
tell you what I think it did for me. So
this meditation class was a combination
of sitting silently for 45 minutes every
day or some sort of other mindful
activity like yoga or walking. And once
a week, uh, our teacher would give like
a presentation about a a topic in
Buddhism that is is probably very very
obvious to all of your listeners. Like
it's something that probably they have
heard of or have come across or are
aware of, right? It was it was not super
esoteric or like late breaking like
Buddhist thoughts. It was it was very uh
kind of simple. And I sort of was like
the whole time I was like, is this
really doing anything? Like I kind of
already know about all this Buddhist
stuff. I've come across it in my
research and this meditation is just
really boring, you know, is this what is
this working? And it did work. Uh my
especially my depression score went down
considerably throughout the course of
this class.
>> Is that a self score or is it a
>> So all of these are self scores. There's
really not a way to measure personality
outside of self assessment. I would
recommend for if people really want to
get super accurate scores, just do the
tests a lot frequently because then
you'll kind of get a sense of like where
you're falling and it won't be like a
random fluke results. But they're all
self scores. Uh but mine went down from
the 94th percentile to the 39th
percentile, which is a lot. My anxiety
went down. My depression just went
significantly low to to I think like I
was considered like not depressed. And I
think it was from these like Buddhist
lessons that they taught us that somehow
>> What's one that What's one that stood
out to you?
>> Okay, so there's one, you're probably
familiar with this. Have you heard of
the double arrow?
>> Mhm.
>> So the double arrow for people who don't
know is this idea that something bad
happens to you. Uh let's say you don't
get as much work done as you wanted to
one day and then you sit there and
berate yourself. Why didn't I get as
much work done today as I wanted? Now
it's going to screw up tomorrow and I'm
not going to get it done on time and my
boss is going to be mad. That second
part is a second arrow that you're
basically shooting yourself with after
the initial misfortune has happened. I
knew this going into the meditation
program, but there was something about
someone kind of explaining it to me as
like a universal human phenomenon and
something that you actually have control
over. Like you don't have to shoot
yourself with this double arrow, the
second arrow. You you don't get any
extra points in life from having two
arrow injuries. you can just acknowledge
that something bad happened and think
about, okay, what am I going to do? How
am I going to move forward in a calm way
without a lot of self-lame? I think that
really made the difference for me. I a
lot of my neuroticism came from
self-lame and I think a lot of other
people's does too. And that class was
really good if you're like a a
self-blamer. It's it was it was very
good at increasing self-compassion.
Having
meditated for a long time now, I I feel
like it's really beautiful hearing about
someone having an experience that in 8
weeks was able to reduce depression that
significantly.
And even hearing about your experience
is is really special because I think one
of the things I find most interesting
about the human mind is we think because
we've heard something
often that we understand it and that
we've realized it and therefore we're
always looking for something new not
realizing that actually it's that
age-old repetition of an idea that then
you get to live and breathe and apply
and then all of a sudden it transforms
your life. And it isn't always about
finding a new. And I think this idea of
always want to watch a new show or a new
episode makes sense because that work
isn't healing or transformative. But
these ideas that are timeless that have
been around for thousands of years,
there's a reason why when they finally
hit, they have this effect that that you
know, you're smiling in front of me
right now and nodding. It's it's that
feeling that you get that you only get
from something that heals you and
transforms you.
>> Yeah. that you've heard it a million
times, but then when the penny drops, it
it stays with you forever.
>> So, there's a couple things about it. It
was a group class, so it was a it was
Zoom because of the pandemic. People
were kind of all sharing their struggles
and we were all kind of going through
these realizations together, too. And so
just seeing how it applied to different
situations even like very simple like
one thing my meditation teacher said was
um she would always say is things happen
that we don't like and like how simple
is that obviously things happen that we
don't like every day something happens
that we don't like but for me I was like
oh every single person here sitting here
has things happen to them that they
don't like it's part of life it's not
always your fault even if it is your
fault sitting there and going ah why am
I always causing things to happen to me
that I don't like is not going to fix
the thing.
>> Yeah.
>> And for me, that was really I don't know
that was therapeutic in a in a way as as
silly as it seems.
>> No, it's I I don't think it's silly at
all. And I remember looking into and I'm
sure you're well aware of this, but the
frequency illusion
>> and that idea has has totally given me
so much confidence on how what we're
both talking about is so real and so
true. So, for those who don't know, the
frequency illusion is when you're
thinking about buying a red car and now
every car that you see on the road is
red. And you think, "Wow, everyone's
just buying red cars. It must be in
fashion. It must be in vogue. Like,
everyone's buying red." The reality is
there are not more red cars. It's just
that now that you're noticing red cars.
So, what you notice appears more often.
So, when you notice things happen that I
don't like, now all you're noticing is
the things that happen that you don't
like. And I always say to people that
when I look at my life and if you
reflected on your life, you can always
tell two stories based on what you
notice. So I could either say today, I
love what I do. I'm so grateful to do
it. I'm really passionate about it. I
wake up and I'm really excited about it
and I get to work with great people. Or
I could say the more I've done what I've
loved, I've attracted more negativity.
I've had people steal money from me.
I've had people want to take advantage
of me. I've been exploited and whatever
else it is. Now, both of those are true
and I don't want to encourage positive
thinking which is no only good things
happen to me because that's not true.
Things happen that I don't like. But the
reality is I don't have to notice them
as much. And ultimately all that's
multiplying is what I'm noticing. And
and that's exactly what you're saying in
this idea that and that's what I think
mindfulness does, especially MBSR, is
this idea of the ability to notice.
>> What am I paying attention to and is it
helping me? And then all of a sudden you
go, "Wait a minute. When I focus on the
double arrow, it doesn't help me. It
doesn't serve me. It doesn't get me
anywhere. I just criticize myself and
hurt and hate myself even more. And now
I've dug an even deeper hole that's
really hard to get out of tomorrow to
get any work done."
>> Exactly. And another common suggestion
for reducing neuroticism is to um have a
gratitude journal.
>> And of course, like when I started this,
I was like, "This is stupid. Why would
anyone do that journaling about gratit
Russians are not big on kind of positive
little journaling practices like that?
>> And kind of the more I did it, the more
I realized that it was helping you
notice the positive story. So like even
on a a dumb day where people on Twitter
would yell at me and my boss is mad at
me and my husband and I got in a fight
or whatever, you know, I could always
find a few things that went relatively
well. you know, just even small things
or just things that I was happy that I
had, you know, that I have that other
people don't have. And, you know, it it
really does change your mindset a little
bit. It makes it it just breaks you out
of that cycle of like everything is bad
uh and my life is bad.
>> Yeah. And and the reason we have to do
it is because we're all so wired. When
have you ever got to a meeting smoothly
and said, "Yeah, it was really smooth
getting here today." Most of the time if
it was a bad journey to get to work that
day, you would talk about it with
everyone the whole day. You'd keep
repeating it. So you would say it 10
times and you would even think about it
every meeting. You'd go, "Oh my god, I
had the worst journey here to work
today. This guy cut me off. There was an
accident. You know, you saw the news."
And you just keep telling that story.
Whereas you'd never say, "Yeah, it was
really smooth today. It was amazing. I'm
just so thankful that every light was
green." And you know, you just don't say
that. And so we have to practice it. The
gratitude journal, I think, has become
such a meme now because it's like
whatever it it's. It's kind of been so
watered down. But the point of it is the
repetition of noticing a good story in
your day because you're so wired to
notice the bad stories every day. I
wanted to ask you, what are the gender
effects on personality?
>> Um, women tend to be more uh
conscientious uh in some ways, more
agreeable, and also much more neurotic.
Uh, neuroticism is like highly
associated with being female.
>> And then men,
>> men tend to be much less agreeable, less
conscientious in certain ways, and then
uh less uh neuroticism. Men tend to have
more of a like
this like it's called the dark triad or
basically like kind of an antagonistic
personality trait uh that women because
of socialization or whatever tend not to
display as much. And that's what makes
heterosexual relationships so hard
because there's a there's a complete
friction of
>> all of the like my husband never mops
the floor or whatever. That's
personality based. Yeah.
>> Yeah. But the thing is it's shared
across men.
>> Mhm.
>> As in it's not like it's just my guy.
>> You occasionally will find someone, you
know, obviously these are all averages.
So you'll find someone who's like below
the average or above. Um but yeah, it
tends to be shared. Yeah.
>> So that's something that all men need to
work on.
>> Yes.
Yeah, exactly.
>> And that's that's the hard part with
that, right? Because romantic
relationships is probably where we see
this the most, where we just say to our
partner, "But that's not who I am.
>> I don't want to be that." And also
because you feel the pressure that your
partner wants you to be that way.
>> What do you do when your partner wants
you to be that way, but you don't want
to be that way for them?
>> You know, there could be another reason
to be that way, though. Like even if it
would just make your relationship a
little bit balier, you know, maybe you
understand each other better, maybe you
communicate better because you agree to
to say things a certain way. My husband
has this with like various thing. He
likes things like he tends to think that
eating the very last bit of something is
rude and I think that leaving a big bag
with a tiny bit of something in it is
rude.
But so now though, I see when I see a
big bag with a little bit piece of
something, I'm like, "Oh, he's trying to
be kind to me, right?" Like I'm seeing
it through his eyes of like he's being
empathetic. And when I like gobble down
the last of the cheese and throw the
package away, he tries to see it as like
I'm being efficient and showing him love
by not leaving crab in the fridge.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that again goes
back to that underlying need because
that's an underlying expression of the
same thing.
>> Yeah. Could you name for us the five
personality traits
>> and then the personalities that are
associated with those?
>> So there's five traits that make up
personality. You can remember them with
the acronym ocean, which is nice cuz
we're in California. So it's openness to
experiences, which is this is the
hardest one, so stay with me. But it's
kind of like people who are open-minded,
kind of down for whatever, kind of just
you suggest a new restaurant to them and
they're like, "Okay, yeah, let's check
it out." C for conscientiousness. These
are the go-getters. They wake up early.
They run every day. They know where all
their stuff is. They work uh really
diligently at everything. They pursue
their goals. These are type type A
individuals. E for extraversion. We all
have some sense of what this is. It's
not just talking a lot. It it's also
like how much you like being around
people and how kind of active you are.
you know, are you kind of more the sit
on the couch person or are you out and
about doing stuff with other people is
extraversion even if you're not talking.
Agreeableness is a and it gets a bad rap
because people think it means just
agreeing with everything, but it's
really how warm and empathetic you are
in your relationships. So, you know, are
you someone who is filled with a lot of
antagonism? Do you start a lot of
conflict with the people in your life?
or are you someone who is able to take
the perspective of others, puts others
needs before your own? So people high in
agreeableness tend to have like a really
deep and meaningful friendships and
relationships,
>> but it could lead to people pleasing on
the negative end.
>> It can. And I've heard from people who
are like, I want to be less agreeable
because I want to be less of a people
pleaser. And there are ways to set
boundaries in relationships that can
still be agreeable and that don't lead
to people pleasing. And then N is
neuroticism. Um, it's kind of it's
basically the two components of it are
depression and anxiety. So, and it's
it's kind of all about how negative your
inner weather is. Like, how gloomy is it
in there? You know, is it all like, you
know, I had the worst commute into work
today because a guy cut me off and blah
blah blah, you know, or are you able to
kind of take a minute in there and smile
at something, laugh with someone, even
just appreciate it being a normal day?
That would be someone who's more
emotionally stable, which is the
opposite of neuroticism.
>> Got it. And introversion fits into
extroversion because each are a scale.
>> Yes.
>> So openness, closed.
>> Yes. Exactly. So they're all
>> conscientiousness. I'm being
unconscious.
>> Yes. Uh so they're all a spectrum. So no
one is 100% one or the other. People are
like, I'm a total introvert. It's you're
probably like 23% of the way to
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> and are we all mixed? Are we all of
them? Right. We have we have we have a
score on the spectrum of each and every
one of them.
>> We all have each of these traits inside
of us to varying degrees. Generally, you
want to be pretty high on all of them
other than neuroticism. You want to be
low on that one. But pretty high doesn't
mean all the way high or extreme or in
every situation or every day. It just
means that like if called upon to give a
wedding toast, you're capable of doing
that. You know, you're not going to melt
down. Yeah,
>> that would be like an appropriate amount
of extraversion.
>> Got it. Got it. Yeah, that's so
interesting you say that because I was
looking at a study that was saying that
if we're asked to give a toast as the
maid of honor at our friend's wedding,
we literally feel like we're being
chased by a tiger, right? Like that's
the response in the brain because we're
so scared of how it could go. And you're
saying ideally you don't feel that way.
And that's a healthy level to be.
>> Yeah. So it's and that doesn't mean that
you would give a toast every day, you
know? It doesn't mean that like what you
would prefer most in the world is to
give a toast. You might still need a lot
of quiet time to yourself, but it's
someone who can kind of rise to those
occasions.
>> So, I have a friend who always says to
me, "Je, I'm not as ambitious as you.
I'm a lot more content and I'm
stable is the words he uses. But then
when we get into it, he'll be honest and
say, I think I'm lazy. I'm not
organized. And I disguise my lack of
ambition
as contentment, but really I'm not
happy. Like I'm I'm anxious. I'm
stressed. I'm not in a good place.
Is that changeable?
>> Yeah. So for my book, I interviewed
several people exactly like that. So
they kind of thought they were just kind
of, oh, whatever happens happens. Kind
of like, you know, I'm I'm content. I'm
not very ambitious. But then one of the
women, Julia, she really wanted to start
her own business. She wanted to have her
own copywriting business, but she worked
as like a assistant at a hair salon,
which was not really what she wanted to
be doing. It was it was a little bit
menial and like just kind of she felt
like she had skills beyond that. And she
really just struggled to get motivated
or like figure out how she was going to
start this business. She kind of just
like flipped overnight. like she again
kind of like my thing with the MBSR
class. She read that like you can
accomplish your goals by just working at
them for 20 minutes a day just in some
self-help book. This is not the secret
to conscientiousness, but for her this
was like, oh, like I could just do a
little bit every day toward my goals.
Like I don't have to suddenly wake up
and be a different person. And she did.
She got super organized. She's like one
of the most organized people I've ever
talked to. She has like all these to-do
lists. She has a calendar. She has Jira
tracking of her client, you know, she's
like very together. And this was someone
who quit her job to start a business and
then watched Game of Thrones for, you
know, months because she didn't have
that skill initially. So, yeah, it's
completely possible.
>> So, how do we do it?
>> So, what I found seems to work for
people is that you have to have, this is
now like a cliche at this point, but you
really have to have a why. One of the
other people that I talked to in that
chapter, he came from this like very
poor rural part of Virginia and he had
never like studied really. He just
wasn't into school and he had never
written a paper before and he didn't
realize that you can study for tests and
in that way you can improve your score.
Um so he gets to college somehow like
the you know whatever low college he
gets into and everyone thinks he's going
to fail out because he's just not school
is not his thing. And then he takes one
psychology class and he's like, "Oh,
this is so interesting. I'm learning
about why people do what they do, the
science of the mind. This is applicable
to me. This is this is fascinating." And
he decides he wants to become an
academic psychologist, like a a
researcher in psychology, which is so
far beyond where he is at that moment.
>> And he does, he honestly just completely
turns his life around. He gets
organized. He gets like a filing cabinet
with all of his homework and all that
stuff. He finds a study buddy, which
having a partner in whatever like
journey you're on is always going to be
more effective. They stay up all night
reading and studying together and
writing essays together and like
puzzling through like what does this
mean? What does that mean? He finds a
mentor in psychology who kind of keeps
him going and and gives him hope. He
makes flashcards for every test. He sets
like timelines for when he's going to
start studying for each psychology quiz.
And he is he is a he is now a tenure
professor in psychology. Uh he got into
UG which is a great grad school for
psychology. And this is someone who I
think made D's in high school. And it's
really about having that thing that he's
like this is what I want to be doing.
This is absolutely how I see it playing
out. And nothing else in his life up
until that point had ignited him in that
same way.
>> What are the strongest types of wise?
>> I would say it's something that is going
to kind of fuel you for the rest of your
life. So people often it's like their
kids. People will do anything for their
kids because they just kind of consume
you and you're you have like an infinite
amount of energy to pour into them. Uh
for me it was really I really wanted to
do journalism and that was a big part of
what made me more conscientious
because I had a series of really boring
jobs before I became a journalist and I
was like I can't spend my whole life
being this bored. Like I cannot go in
day in day out and not look forward to
anything or learning anything or any
kind of interesting conversation just to
you know I was I was a a secretary at a
mail order mailbox company
>> and I was like this is this is so
tedious. This is so boring. I hate
mailboxes. I don't care.
>> And I was like I I can't do this for the
rest of my life. No shade to the people
who work there. So that is something
it's like you you can be kind of running
away from something. Um you can be
running towards something. It's
something that's going to just kind of
fuel you forever, not not for the next,
you know, week.
>> Yeah. Okay. So, you need a why. What
else?
>> As I mentioned previously, having
someone who's kind of on the journey
with you can be, for some reason, really
empowering. It's called the mutually
reinforcing effect. And it essentially
means that you kind of are are learning
from someone, right? You're getting
strategies from them. So he was getting
these like study skills from this other
person, but he was also kind of learning
alongside him. Like they were kind of it
kind of creates this positive sense of
peer pressure where you're like,
>> "Let's do it together. Let's like run
this race together." It makes you feel
like less alone, especially when things
get really hard. Like I think it it was
for him at times.
>> Okay. And then what else?
>> There's a final concept called episodic
future thinking. So a lot of times we
have trouble being conscientious because
we can't see how it will all kind of
look in the end. So I am not talking
about the secret here but it's kind of
about visualizing with very specific
details either the outcome that you're
trying to generate or the outcome that
you're trying to avoid. So for Julia the
woman who had the business it was you
know I'm working for myself. I set my
own schedule. I have all these clients.
you know, I never have to see this hair
salon again. And it was it was very
clear to her like how she was going to
set up her home office, how she was
going to run her day, how she was going
to do this. So, she had all the like
kind of visualized pieces of it. And
that would kind of keep her motivated
when it inevitably got hard. For some
people, it can be something negative.
And as long as you're not so bogged down
in the negativity, that can be
motivating. So, the the guy who became a
psychologist, his big fear was becoming
an assistant manager at Wendy's.
because that was like the only job that
was available in his hometown. And so he
was like, "If I have to go back to my
hometown and be an assistant manager at
Wendy's, like I can't I can't do that. I
can't handle that. I have to do well at
school because I I can't have this like
Wendy's future happen to me." So that
that kind of thing can be really
motivating and that's um you know
connecting things to a bigger vision
like that. A lot of the stuff that
you're going to be doing for
conscientiousness is going to be kind of
tedious. like you know scheduling guests
for your podcasts I bet is like not the
most fun process like sending these
emails and like finding a time but it's
like necessary for the larger vision. So
if you keep your focus on that larger
vision it will motivate you through
those like difficult times. Yeah, I
think that's such a big important part
because I often think when people think
of their purpose or their calling or a
better life, it's without any difficult
tedious tasks.
>> Yes.
>> And that's just not reality. I talk to
friends all the time and I keep
reminding them that you're always doing
things you don't want to do to do more
of the things you want to do. And that's
how life works. There's very few people
on planet Earth, if any, that only wake
up and do everything they want to do.
And anyone who says that is probably
just paraphrasing for well, it all is
things I love because it's feeding and
serving a bigger vision. And I also like
what you were saying because I think for
me it was like that when I was in a
stable consulting job before I do what I
do now. The only thing that got me out
of there was I didn't want to be like
the people who are 20 years senior to me
in those roles. Again, no offense to
anyone who works there. They're happy
there. That's great. I just couldn't see
myself being someone there when I was 45
or 50 or whatever it was. And at the
same time, I couldn't imagine getting to
the end of my life and thinking I didn't
try. And that visual for me was really,
really powerful. and even probably the
one I use most today where I'm like at
the end of my life if I'm lying there
and I'm hopefully conscious enough to
reflect, I'm never ever ever going to be
sad that I tried something and people
thought I was bad at it or there was
terrible criticism or people laughed at
me because at that point none of that
will matter because I'll be forgotten in
a matter of moments and the most
important thing will be what I'll
remember about my life which is I tried.
I gave it a shot. I explored. I
experimented. And I'll be proud of
myself for doing that. And and I think
that visual is such a powerful way of
whether it's like you said 5 years, 10
years, 20 years, or whether it's all the
way to the end, it's such a powerful
motivator that really puts things into
context that you can't right now.
>> Exactly. Yeah. And I mean, even, you
know, people who are professionals at
being gritty struggle with this. As one
example, one of the people I interviewed
was Angela Duckworth, who literally
wrote Grit, so the book about how to
stick with your goals. She has trouble
sticking with her goals. So, she doesn't
like making the PowerPoint slides for
her classes that she told me. Like, so
she, this is a tedious thing for her.
It's not fun. It's like fixing the font
and like making it readable and all that
stuff. She doesn't enjoy it, but she
does it because it's so important to her
to teach people about psychology and to
be, you know, a good professor and to
connect with her students that she's
like powers through these like
PowerPoint sessions. So, I think that
was like a really good example because
I'm like, if anyone knows how to be
gritty, it's it's her, you know, but
even she struggles with it.
>> Yeah. If someone wants to be more
extroverted, what do they do every day?
What do they need to change?
>> All you have to do is talk to people and
it can take
>> when you don't want to.
>> Yes. It can take whatever form you want,
but my recommendation for people who are
introverts, who are kind of just
starting out, maybe you just moved
somewhere new and you want to meet new
people, sign up for an activity that
happens regularly that you don't have to
organize because I think where people
get stuck is in the endless like text
chain of doom of like, how about
Tuesday? How about Wednesday? How about
drinks? How about here? How about there?
Like it's really hard to make things
happen in our society because everyone's
so overscheduled, everyone's busy,
everyone kind of has this inclination
toward introversion. So just sign up for
something like pickle ball or like
whatever your thing is, whatever you can
tolerate. That's like a group activity
that's going to happen with or without
you because that's to me like seeing the
same people regularly over time is how
you build connections and how you build
friendships and not through like just
being really good at scheduling. Yeah,
it's almost I I remember for me it was I
was around 15 years old. I was doing
work experience at this company that my
I'd been connected to and my job was to
cold call 300 companies and try and sell
event space for an exhibition.
And I had never cold called in my life
at 15 years old. I didn't even know what
that meant. And I remember getting a
quick coaching session with someone who
was really warm and actually really
nice. His name was Joel and just such a
kind guy at the time, like he was in his
30s probably, but showing me the ropes.
And I remember just calling 300 and he
told me, "Hey, most of them won't
respond. Most of them will say no." And
I probably only sold three out of 300
exhibition spots. But I felt so
confident to be rejected and cold call
from that point because I'd picked up
the phone and talked to 300 people. And
I didn't feel like a failure, which is a
really bizarre counterintuitive feeling
because I failed 297 times, but the
three exhibition slots I sold were just
such big wins. And he was just like,
"Yeah, those are the odds." Like that's
just how it works. And I feel like that
was the moment I built a sense of
confidence around being exposed to
rejection. So, it's almost like what
you're saying is that exposure therapy
of, hey, if you're not good at talking
to people and you're bad at organizing
yourself, pick something that's
organized and just talk to one person
and then next week talk to two people
there and then next week talk to three
people. And that exposure therapy slowly
slowly slowly by the end of the eight
weeks, you're like, "Oh, wow. I I'm
comfortable talking to people at pickle
ball now." Or whatever it may be.
>> Yeah. And it's, you know, not every
conversation is going to go perfectly.
Like not every person you meet is I had
some really awkward conversations that I
describe in the book like with these new
people I was talking to.
>> Tell us about some of them.
>> So I was doing a lot of meetup where you
go on like group outings with people.
Usually it's like hiking or something
like that. So it's a bunch of strangers
who who hike together. Again if you go
regularly hopefully you get to know some
of them. And I was doing a lot of like
Bumble Bumble. Yeah. Bumble BFF. And uh
the Bumble BFF actually worked for me. I
did meet a friend on Bumble BFF. um and
we're still friends, but one of them was
like, oh, she was trying to tell me that
um women peak in high school, that she
was not looking for a partner and was
not ever interested in dating again
because we were in our 30s and women
peak physically in high school. And I
was like, I really don't think women
peak in high school. That's really
depressing.
Yeah. And I was just like, how do I
navigate out of this like very like
specific thing that you said that I
really don't agree with and that makes
me sad that you think that. But so yeah,
you're going to meet people who you're
like, "Wow, I don't agree with you at
all about that, you know, or just people
who have like political opinions that
are different from yours or whatever it
might be." But, you know, then you'll
meet someone like my bumble bff, Alex.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. I think what's hard
about it is that humans feel the more
certain we are about who we are, the
safer we are.
>> And so when you start becoming uncertain
about who you are and open to the idea
that you could be more, it's a scary
place to live because it's
uncomfortable. But you don't like the
idea that you met someone at 30, they're
really outgoing and now you're like,
"No, no, no. I'm a homebody. That's
that's who I am." like stop trying to
change me and yeah sure I agree with you
don't change for that person but have
you ever asked yourself whether you want
to be more than a homebody have you
explored have you experienced it to even
know whether that's what you want and I
think we're scared to do that because we
feel sure that no no I'm a homebody and
that's my identity and that's what my
friends know me for and all my friends
will be like yeah you're a homebody and
it evokes a sense of identity and
purpose to some degree even though it
isn't a purpose
But it makes me feel like people know
who I am and I know who I am. So as soon
as I start changing my wife went through
this. So my wife was someone who was
considered by her friends, family and
people around her that she was
unorganized. She was spontaneous
although she's the best time. So my wife
is the best energy. She is magnetic.
Everyone loves her, adores her. She does
she didn't used to make plans. She
didn't have a plan. And it was really
hard to get hold of her. And that's
that's the reputation she'd build up.
And then when she started to change
that, so when she started to say, "Hey,
sorry, I can't actually make that. I'm
I've got work right now." Or, "Do you
know what? That day I've got an event. I
can't make it." Before she was always
available, always open because she
didn't have a schedule. People started
to make her feel bad about that,
>> being like, "Oh, you've changed. Oh, but
you always used to be up for this
before. Oh, I realize you're busy, too
busy for me now." And it was really
interesting to watch her go through that
because she was doing it for all the
right reasons because she wanted to be
someone who was organized, disciplined.
She was always disciplined in her
workouts but not as much in in her work.
And that shifted for her and now she's
extremely productive and effective and
all the rest of it and very happy about
it. But that changed. She had a lot of
friends who didn't react well to that.
And I think that's what people are
scared of. Does that make sense?
>> Oh yeah. I I completely identify with
that on so many levels. So, first I
think anyone who's ever given up
drinking has had this exact thing play
out where everyone in your life suddenly
says like, "Come on, like you're a party
man. Like, what what's going on with
you? Like, you're not going to be fun
anymore." And then you have to like
create this new identity of someone who
still has friends but doesn't drink. The
thing that was really resonant about
that for me was that so for a long time
I identified as someone who would almost
certainly be a bad mom. I was like, I am
the kind of person who if I ever have a
kid, I would mess up my kid cuz I would
be such a bad mom. I'm not fit to have
kids. I just had this story about myself
that like I can't do it. Even though I
kind of wanted to do it, but I was like,
no, no, no. Like, it's not for me. I'm
I'm not a kid person, right? And people
kind of reinforced this in my life. So,
I remember when I got pregnant, my mom
told me, I can't imagine you as a
mother.
And I think for me there was like some
comfort in that because like having a
child is scary. It's and I'm not saying
that everyone should or anything like
that, but it is it is is a big leap.
It's like it feels like a big it is a
huge change in your life and it's a big
decision to make. It really like that
fear I was kind of explaining it away by
like I don't need to make this decision
because I won't be a good mom anyway.
That totally has not played out. Like
I'm I'm a great mom. Like I I love my
son and I adore him. The stuff that I
thought I wouldn't like about it is the
stuff I like the most. The stuff that I
thought I would be best at is like I
actually don't find that enjoyable. I
always ask myself like why did I tell
myself for so long that I was certain to
be a certain way or that I'm just like
doomed to be a bad mom. I think we get
that way about so many things in our
lives and it's counterproductive.
>> Yeah. And it's hard because at one point
it's it's hard because there's a sense
of honesty and self-awareness at a point
in time. It's when that story becomes
finite and fatalistic that it becomes
dangerous.
>> Right? There have been points in my life
where me saying I'm just not the type of
entrepreneur that goes on vacation right
now has served me. But if I'm the
entrepreneur forever that never goes on
vacation, that is going to hurt me. And
so I think it's that nuanced balance
between how is this self-awareness
but not a self-defeating story. That's a
really hard balance for people to toggle
almost because it requires so much
awareness, honesty,
not falling into the extremes. It just
requires I don't even know what the
right word is. Maybe it's maturity. It
requires such a maturity to be able to
hold an idea and not make it your
identity, if that makes sense.
>> Oh, yeah. And the thing you have to keep
in mind is that people and situations
will bring things out in you that you
didn't think were there. like very few
people before they've ever had a baby
like are naturally baby people, you
know. And first of all, they're only a
baby for a year, so you don't even
really have to worry about it that much.
But um you know, I kind of surprised
myself that like you know, we bring this
little bundle home, a couple months go
by, they start kind of being more
interactive and smiley and stuff. And
you do, you start singing Baby Beluga
and, you know, cooing at them and
cuddling. you know, you start doing all
this stuff because as you take on social
roles uh or as you kind of pursue goals
that are important to you, you kind of
find things within yourself that you
didn't think were there before. Like we
kind of have these like latent traits
that that come out when the moment is
right. So even if like you don't think
of yourself as a certain kind of person,
you might surprise yourself when that
situation comes up.
>> Yeah, that's what I'm trying to figure
out. It's like it's almost not like
because you can't live this
kind of willy-nilly approach to life of
just oh it doesn't matter I'll figure it
out when I get there because that could
be dangerous and then at the same time
you can't be the over planner and the
overwhelmed person who's trying to get
every meticulous detail right of it
because certain skills are only going to
come up in the moment. What is that
balance called? Is there even a word for
it? I think this is called um social
investment theory but it's essentially
this idea that over time situations do
change us like as there you know there
have been studies that found that as
people you know get a job that they're
really interested in and become really
committed to they become more
conscientious
>> naturally of course they're like
learning this skill in order to do it
for their job after people fall in love
they've done studies that found that
they become more extroverted and more
agreeable because your partner is
bringing out those qualities in you,
like they're kind of like highlighting
these good parts of you and and saying
like, "Look, look, you you have this in
you." And I think that's really cool.
Like, I think it's it's good to know
that as you you take on these roles,
eventually over time, you know, it's
going to be gradual, you'll kind of
shapeshift to meet the moment. And, you
know, you have to want to do it. You
know, there's a lot of like parents out
there who could probably stand to put
more of a concerted effort into it. But
I do think it's it's hopeful that
situations will bring out qualities in
us.
>> How does this work apply to people in
relationships where they want their
partner to change and you'll hear
someone go, I just see their potential.
I knew I know who they could be. They
could they could really get it together,
but they don't see it in themselves.
>> Yeah.
>> When someone's thinking that way, how
would you encourage them to think about
change? I really wish I had written a
chapter of this book called How to
Change Your Partner because every single
interviewer has asked me that question
and I don't really have a good answer
because we haven't really studied how to
change other people. Like this is like
the brick wall that all of society like
bangs their head against which is that
we all wish our partners were a certain
way and that their partners are never
going to be that way completely. So
first of all like any profound and
serious change over time has to come
from within, right? Like if if you
really want to make someone like less
anxious, saying like just calm down,
stop worrying, you know, it doesn't
work. Uh they have to want to be less
anxious. For some of the skills though
or for some of the traits, it can be
something where like maybe you introduce
your partner to some of the tools that
will help them be more conscientious.
Maybe like you start an exercise program
together, for example. Maybe you start,
hey, let's like both set a time every
week where we're going to sync up our
calendars and figure out who needs to be
where when. You can do these like little
tools and strategies to kind of move
them closer uh especially to
conscientiousness. This has been found
to work well where like you can kind of
do it in the background and it just kind
of works. They don't have to really want
it. It's hard because in order to keep
that going, in order to go on a run, you
know, without you, they have to want to
to do it. People want different things
in life. That's that's like part of what
motivates personality change and what
motivates everything else. You could
try, you know, asking them if they're
they seem to be living in accordance
with their values. It's like, hey, you
said that you really wanted to exercise
this year and we haven't done anything
in weeks. Do you feel like we're
exercising enough? Like you could do
some motivational interviewing. But
ultimately, you know, people have to
find it in themselves to to do the the
things that are good for them.
>> Yeah. People don't change for people.
No,
>> they change for themselves
>> and they change when they want to. They
change how they want to. And they change
at their pace in their time. And this
idea that you have the power to change
anyone.
>> If you just stopped for a moment and
thought about how hard it's been to
change yourself,
>> right?
>> You'd immediately realize that you have
zero power over anyone else. And the
reason why you're being asked by
everyone is because I think it's the
biggest myth because we think that if we
can see someone's potential, we can
change them. We think that if we can see
someone's amazing future, we can change
them. And we think if we can see what
someone could be and achieve that we're
somehow holier than them for seeing
that. And we think of it as
well-intentioned,
but actually it's not because
well-intentioned means I let you become
who you want to become. and I accept
that that's who you are. And sometimes
it's painful because you can truly see
what someone's capable of and that can
be well-intentioned.
But until they really believe they want
that for themselves, it really doesn't
matter. And and that's that is one of
the most painful things to watch is
someone lose out on their potential.
>> Yeah. I mean, and you can talk to any,
you know, relative of an addict or
anyone who, you know, sees a clear path
for someone and they won't take it. Um,
it's it's very hard to make other people
do things that you think are good.
>> How does someone who's more pessimistic
and negative and is listening to us
right now and thinking, Olga, I want to
become more of an optimistic or at least
realistic person. Where do I start? How
does that personality change look?
>> Well, you've come to the right place cuz
I am very negative and pessimistic. I
would say I still am even despite you
know this this huge project that I did
where I really really tried to change
myself. So something that I came across
that was really helpful for this is uh
the work of Tracy Dennis Tawari who's a
psychologist who studies anxiety and a
big thing kind of an idea that I had
about my anxiety was that I need anxiety
to kind of help me avoid bad stuff. like
I need like I will I will uh screw up
and like not get where I need to be or
like you know mess things up if unless I
stay really anxious and vigilant. And
eventually what that would do is is turn
into just constantly worrying and
constantly being in a negative space
where I was I was never really enjoying
anything because I was worrying about
the next thing. So anxiety you can
worry, you can think about the things
that could go wrong, right? Like if
you're putting in an offer on a house or
trying to get a new job or whatever
you're you're doing, you can think about
like, oh, how how could this interview
go wrong, right? But also think about
how it could go right. Really, most
things in life, some things go wrong and
some things go right. Like you know what
we were saying earlier. And you can
actually make a list of your worries of
like things that could go wrong with
this. But then make another column of
like things that could go right with
this and how will I try to move like
more of these into this other column
because it is it's unrealistic to only
worry and to only think about the
negative because some amount of things
will will go well or even if some of
those bad things happen there might be
good in them or
>> things that are you know maybe not so
bad as as you feared. Um so I would just
I call it reverse worrying and it's just
it's not just like positive thinking.
I'm sure everything will be fine. It's
just some things will be fine.
>> Yeah. And I like the idea of consciously
having to think about those
>> again. It's just rewiring those thoughts
that are so habituated
to constantly pull you in that negative
cycle. And and you're right, it isn't
this false toxic positivity because that
isn't helpful or healthy at all. And it
does take a lot of practice and
repetition because yeah, you're likely
to wake up in the morning and the first
thought you have is, "Oh, I'm so tired.
Just don't want to get out of bed." And
so your first thought of the day is a
negative, pessimistic one
>> as opposed to an optimistic, thoughtful
one of, "All right, I'm glad I got six
hours last night, you know, or okay,
well, yeah, I didn't get enough sleep
last night. Let me get to bed early
tonight." Whatever that may be could
could make the shift. What about someone
who's feeling like they're a people
pleaser and they want to set boundaries,
but they struggle with it because
they're scared of being seen as selfish
or assertive. How did they start making
that shift?
>> I've really had to apply this with
parenting, but you can kind of uh in a
in in a way you can kind of parent
people around you. Not literally, but
you can kind of like use some of the
tools from parenting with other people,
which is make people feel heard. Like if
someone's upset with you about
something, to give you an example, I had
a friend who texted me to say that she
wanted me to check in with her via text
message at least once a week and that we
were not going to be friends unless I
text check-in with her once a week.
>> And I don't like texting. I just it's
it's a it's a very like a scheduling
platform for me, not a like emotional
one. And I I just don't like it. And so
at the time, I sort of was like because
it was before this project, I was like,
"Oh, of course I'll do whatever you
want. I'll people please, right? I'll
I'll text you every week." And of
course, I did it twice and then forgot
because I don't actually like doing it.
So what I learned from Miriam Kermier,
who's like a friendship expert, is you
can say like, "Hey, I hear you. You feel
like I'm not checking in with you
enough. You feel like we're not
connected. I totally get that.
The thing is, I really don't like
texting people in order to have
conversations. It interrupts my
workflow. Is there another way that we
can do this that will meet your
underlying need of being seen in this
friendship and being checked in on and
have going through this hard thing? You
know, with me checking on you, but not
require me to use this platform that I
really don't like to do this thing that
I really feel like it's not well
equipped for. You know, maybe we could
schedule a weekly phone call. Maybe we
could go for a walk. maybe we could do,
you know, this other list of activities.
There's almost always a solution like
that where you're meeting the underlying
need, but you're not doing it in this
way that is like not workable for you.
>> I love that because it is an underlying
need. That person doesn't really want a
text every week. No,
>> that's that's them trying to find the
bare minimum way to keep you in their
life. That's really what they're doing
is what's the least I can ask for to try
and keep this person alive in my life,
but what I actually want is a really
meaningful conversation once a month on
the phone or in person where we go out
for dinner or have tea or whatever it
may be. And that's what I'm really
looking for. And I think the more our
relationships go to solving the
underlying need, the less bitter we'll
feel around, hey, but I texted you every
week and you still don't feel close to
me. Mhm.
>> I remember one of my friends said to me,
she said, "I just don't spend any time
with my partner." And I said, "Well, he
just told me you guys went away last
weekend." And she said, "Yeah, but he
was reading a book or the news or
whatever it was, and I was trying to
entertain the kids and we didn't spend
any time together." And I was like,
well, the underlying need is alone time,
presence, connection. It's not time. You
did have time together. You were both in
the same place at the same time, but the
underlying need is wanting connection in
a in a safe space. And probably and and
you know, it's asking that person, what
is that underlying need? And all of a
sudden, you start to realize it's eye
contact. It's uh it's vulnerability.
It's being able to share something that
I've been struggling with. And and and I
find that no one ever communicates that.
We always communicate as like, "Oh, can
we just see each other once a week?"
Yeah.
>> And that's not really, you know, what
you're looking for.
>> Yeah. And this also works, I found, with
like political disagreements. So, when
someone just comes at you with I have
people in my life who I really disagree
with politically on on very important
issues. When someone comes at you and
just starts ranting at you about their
worldview that you don't agree with,
often it's because they are kind of
making a bid for connection. like
they're like, "Hey,
>> this thing is so important to me. Like,
is it important to you too?" Like
they're kind of trying to get you into
their world. Um, and once you see that,
it becomes less about like this person
is my political enemy and more about
this person wants to establish a
friendship. Let's find something else to
like base it on because we don't agree
on this. But, you know, it can become
almost like a like a friendly thing as
opposed to this, you know, political
fight. That's a really beautiful nuance
point of if you notice people's
conversations as a expression of them
inviting you into their world, which is
often what it is.
You start realizing it's actually not
that much of a it doesn't have some deep
agenda or something. It's just them
saying this is what I think about. It's
it's really tough because we're all so
busy and moving so fast that when you
see something you don't like or doesn't
and I think that's where we've got to in
society today is if I see a message or
someone posts something on their stories
that I don't like I start labeling them
as someone that I don't want to interact
with rather than seeing that person as
just a human who's expressing their
thoughts, beliefs, and things they're
interested in.
>> Exactly.
>> And we just don't have the time and
capacity for that. I was going to ask,
can an introvert actually become an
extrovert if they want to?
>> So, I think they can, but I would
recommend against thinking of yourself
as a pure introvert or extrovert. It's
really uncommon to be all the way to one
end or the other of introversion and
extroversion. Let's say you you are
quite introverted though, like like you
would basically consider yourself almost
all the way introverted. I think it is
possible to become extroverted, but it's
it's going to take a lot of work. It's
going to take a lot of effort. I think I
kind of realized that I was more
extroverted than I maybe was thinking at
the beginning of this project. Like I
kind of found that I when I didn't go to
improv, I would really miss it. Or when
I didn't go to my little silly meetups,
I was kind of like the weekend felt a
little empty. So I I would kind of avoid
categorizing yourself and I would I
would just see what it feels like to
have more social interaction than you're
used to. But let's say it it doesn't
feel amazing. Like let's say you're like
it's is actually quite exhausting and
you're like I do need that quiet time
alone to recharge. There's this concept
called free traits that some
psychologists have which is that like
rather than permanently changing to
where it's like I'm a I'm a total
extrovert in every situation. I want to
talk to people. You kind of learn the
ability to kind of try on this
personality trait. It's almost like an
invisibility cloak or something where
you can kind of like put on extraversion
and then do whatever it is you need to
do with that extraversion. Um, so a lot
of times college professors will do this
cuz they have to give these like
interesting lectures, you know, but
they're the way they got to where they
are is cuz they're good at like reading
papers for, you know, 12 hours at a
time. So they're usually they are pretty
introverted. And Brian Little, um, he
kind of does say that he puts on
extraversion. like he puts on the free
trade of extroversion, goes out and
gives his lecture and then he has to
like go hide by himself. He can't, you
know, stay in that room in glad hand. He
has to go retreat and kind of restore to
his uh introversion. So that's another
way to think about about it. I think
that's still personality change cuz it's
still allowing you to meet your goals
that you have and it's not permanent,
but uh you know to anyone who talks to
him, he would be an extrovert. And it
and it's just reconciling that with
again I I just see this challenge that
we have with that today which I don't
think is it's valid but it's not
justified this idea of oh but that's
inauthentic like you're just you're just
using you're just manipulating something
or you're adopting a skill and it's like
well no we all have to have skills at
work that we don't use at home.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. you're not that person at work
and you wouldn't try and organize your
family in the way you project manage at
work and it's not inauthentic to turn
that off at home. It's it's normal to do
that. And so yes, if you need to develop
communication skills to get promoted,
that's a healthy investment because
that's an important part of your life if
it is. And those skills will probably
come in handy at home and in your
personal life, too.
>> Oh, totally. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, it's almost like how do we
start looking at life as the
accumulation of skills and abilities and
traits and habits as opposed to shifting
our entire identity because of that.
>> Just in the same way as if you wore
color today, you're now not someone who
just wears color.
>> Exactly.
>> It's, you know, but it's it's weird how
the mind kind of plays that trick
>> in saying, "Oh, I'm just people pleasing
or I'm just shapeshifting," which I
think has become such a worry today.
>> Yeah. Or masking people. Yeah. I've
heard about like people saying I'm I'm
masking if I'm like doing anything
functional and I'm like no I mean we are
all masking to some extent like you I
have to go on the radio sometimes and
that's definitely you know I I don't
talk all the time like I talk on NPR
like you know we we all have different
uh ways of presenting ourselves
depending on the situation.
>> Yeah definitely. I wanted to ask you a
last few sections of question. How does
this apply to people who are diagnosed
with depression or ADHD, can they also
change that through this work or is that
very different?
>> There's actually been this push in
psychology to identify the personality
traits that are associated with things
like depression and ADHD. So, my
depression score went way down with
changing neuroticism. Neuroticism and
depression um and anxiety are very
closely linked. A lot of these things
that we think of as sort of mental
illnesses or mental health conditions
actually have a personality trait
component to them. And MBSR, the class
that I took, actually has gone
headto-head with Lexapro, the
anti-depressant, and it works just as
well. So, in some ways, changing Yeah.
>> Wow.
>> So, in some ways, changing your
personality traits can address some of
these, whatever you want to call them,
mental health conditions that you might
not be thrilled with to have in your
life. So, if it is depression, you know,
something like meditation or therapy can
really go a great deal to to addressing
that. If it's something like ADHD, some
people think that's just like a form of
low conscientiousness. So, if you think
about it, it's just uh not having the
systems in place to remember where your
stuff is and where you need to be and
what's on your calendar. So, a lot of
the the therapists who work with adults
with ADHD basically just uh give them
the tools that that they use for
conscientiousness. So, it's like, here's
a Google calendar, like fill it out with
every single thing you need to do this
week. Here's, you know, to-d doist, an
app that I use. Here's a clock that you
can set 15 minutes ahead of time. It's
coming up with the tools that people use
to change personality traits, too. And
there's actually a a new effort to treat
a borderline personality disorder, which
is a mental condition. Um, it also has a
personality component, obviously, by
changing personality traits. It's using
some of the strategies in the book and
and through therapy to actually shift
people's levels of agreeableness and and
so forth and and actually help cure BPD.
>> Yeah. I think we're just living at that
time right now where it feels like work
to go to MBSR or to therapy and you
don't actually end up having any skills.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Like with the pill like you don't
you don't change your reality. you're
numbing something or you're better at
dealing with it or there's a a sense of
this doesn't worry me anymore, but
there's not really an expansion of
ability and skill and and my I mean I'm
mindful of the fact that people are on
very very different levels and may need
it, but it's quite fascinating to hear
that MBSR has that ability and similar
scores.
>> Yeah. And and what you have to keep in
mind is that and I'm pro
anti-depressants, whatever works for
people, but you know, they can reach a
point where they don't work very well
anymore, but the skills that you learn
through something like meditation,
mindfulness, even like a, you know, a
cognitive behavioral therapy, they'll be
with you through life, even when you
don't
>> have your Xanax handy or whatever. So,
it's something I recommend maybe doing
even in tandem with whatever
anti-depressant.
>> We end every episode of On Purpose with
a final five. So these questions have to
be answered in one word to one sentence
maximum. Okay.
>> So Olga Hazan, these are your final
five. Question number one is, what is
the best advice you've ever heard or
received? And you can apply it all to
personality in your world. So what is
the best advice you've ever heard or
received?
>> Go work at a place that will let you do
exactly what you want to be doing, even
if it's a very small establishment.
>> Uh question number two, what is the
worst advice you've ever heard or
received? that if something is
difficult, it's not worth doing.
>> Question number three, what's something
that you used to think was true about
personality, but now you've changed your
mind on it.
>> I used to think that your birth order
was the most important uh thing that
determined your personality.
>> Interesting.
>> And it is actually not at all important.
>> Let's talk about that because people
feel like from the first child or the
third child or the middle child,
>> eldest daughter. Yeah.
>> Yeah. None of that none of that stuff's
real.
>> No.
>> Wow. There are some gender effects so
that you could be picking up on like
being a daughter versus a son, but uh
there the birth order it's very
negligible. It's it's extremely small.
>> Uh question number four. What is the
biggest change that you've seen in
yourself going on this journey that
you're most grateful for now looking
back?
>> Oh, it's that I think I need to connect
with other people in order to be happy.
>> And you didn't used to believe that. No,
I used to think that I could just be a
little astronaut in space and never talk
to anyone and be totally fine. I think I
especially as a new mom, I joined a
bunch of new moms groups and I I really
need those. You can't do it alone.
>> I love that. Uh, fifth and final
question. We ask this to every guest
who's ever been on the show. If you
could create one law that everyone in
the world had to follow, what would it
be?
>> No flaking on plans at the last minute.
>> What's with that?
>> I love it when someone cancels on me.
It's like such a
>> Oh, you you have the joy of missing out.
Yeah.
>> I never cancel last minute because I'm
not that guy, but I love someone can
canceling on me last minute.
>> No, it's so And it's always like, you
know, I just can't today. It's like,
yes, you can. You do it every other day.
Like, come on.
>> I love it. There has to be some
punishment for that then if if you break
that law.
>> I No. Hanging out with that person for a
whole week. I don't know. I don't know
what the punishment would be.
>> I love it. Everyone, the book is called
Me But Better: The Science and Promise
of Personality Change by Olga Huzzan. I
hope you've enjoyed this conversation.
Make sure you share your favorite
reflections, the experiments you're
trying, the takeaways from the book as
you're reading it. Please post them and
tag both of us on Instagram, on Tik Tok.
I love seeing all your stories and reels
to see what resonates with you. Olga,
thank you so much for coming on the show
again. It's been wonderful to meet you
and uh thank you so much for helping us
teach us how to be ourselves but better.
So, thank you so much.
>> Yeah, thank you so much.
>> If you love this episode, you'll love my
conversation with Dr. Joe Dispensza on
why stress and overthinking negatively
impacts your brain and heart and how to
change your habits that are on
autopilot. Listen to it right now. How
many times do we have to forget until we
stop forgetting and start remembering?
That's the moment of change. No one
cares how many times you fell off the
bicycle.